ARGUING ABOUT PROHIBITION\nPart 1\n\nPress the 'Enter' key to continue.\n 

\tIn 1920, the US government adopted the Eighteenth Amendment to the Constitution, outlawing the manufacture, sale, and transport of intoxicating liquors. Many supporters of the constitutional ban, widely known as Prohibition, believed it would be permanent, but a mere 13 years later it became the first amendment ever to be repealed. In the ensuing years, Prohibition was vilified as a failed, unrealistic attempt by religious extremists to impose their values on the public. According to this view, Prohibition foundered because US citizens simply continued to drink as before, as consumption was driven underground. Meanwhile, the legitimate liquor industry was decimated, and illegal alcohol sales became a huge new source of income for organized-crime groups. Today, Prohibition has become a byword for the mistake of attempting to eliminate sin and vice through oppressive legislation, casting a shadow over later discussions of government social initiatives. Advocates of gun control are routinely compared to prohibitionists, and the tobacco industry is said to have benefited from the bad taste that Prohibition left in the public’s mouth.\n 

According to the author of the passage, the view of the Eighteenth Amendment among modern Americans is that it\n(1) was initially a failure but had long-term positive effects on future generations’ attitudes toward alcohol consumption.\n(2) clearly demonstrated the need for stricter legislation to prevent organized crime from spreading throughout society.\n(3) served to firmly establish the sale and manufacture of alcohol as a
cornerstone of business in the United States.\n(4) contributed to making the public doubtful of government legislation aimed at correcting social problems.\n 



ARGUING ABOUT PROHIBITION\nPart 2\n\nPress the 'Enter' key to continue.\n 

\tHistorians such as Jack S. Blocker Jr. of the University of Western Ontario, however, argue that common perceptions of Prohibition arise from ignorance of historical facts. Blocker holds that Prohibition functioned as a public health initiative in a period before the emergence of modern civic health policies, and he maintains that the Eighteenth Amendment was a rational move that enjoyed widespread support. While admitting that the anti-alcohol movement originated in Protestant churches, he says its proponents came to place a greater emphasis on the medical and social dangers of alcohol consumption. In this, the movement gained backing from physicians and economists worried about the dramatic rise in alcohol consumption in the early 1900s. Moreover, Blocker offers data showing that Prohibition did in fact reduce drinking, and that rates did not return to pre-Prohibition levels until the 1960s.\n 

How does Jack S. Blocker Jr. characterize the twentieth-century Prohibition movement?\n(1) It evolved from a religious movement to one motivated by concerns about alcohol’s effect on public health and social welfare.\n(2) Its supporters were motivated more by the damage that alcohol consumption was doing to the economy than by health concerns.\n(3) It gained popularity for its promised solution to the alcohol problem despite warnings from experts about the negative political consequences.\n(4) It reflected the general belief that prevention of illness has a more positive effect on the economy than medical treatment by physicians.\n 



ARGUING ABOUT PROHIBITION\nPart 3\n\nPress the 'Enter' key to continue.\n 

\tAuthor Daniel Okrent offers an alternative view of Prohibition. Okrent says that an “unlikely coalition,” which included anti-immigration activists and advocates of implementing an income tax, was responsible. At a time when millions of immigrants were flooding into the country, native-born, white Protestant Americans saw their political power diminishing and sought to weaken the political clout of saloon owners, who had enormous influence over immigrant voters. Fueled by anti-German propaganda during World War I, they also saw breweries, which were largely German-owned, as a menace to society. Prohibition became a stand-in issue that could be used to stem the rising tide of immigrants’ political influence. Similarly, income-tax advocates seized on Prohibition as a means for depriving the government of a crucial revenue source. About half the federal government’s revenue came from an excise tax on alcohol, and Prohibition would make the implementation of the first US income tax a necessity. Okrent argues that though many people who voted for Prohibition were drinkers themselves, they voted for it as a means to an end that was not what it appeared to be on the surface.\n 

Daniel Okrent believes the members of the “unlikely coalition” responsible for putting Prohibition into effect were
(1) united in the belief that alcohol was such a threat to the US immigrant population that drastic measures were required to help them.
(2) dominated by white Protestants who voted for the movement because they felt it was unethical that alcohol was not being taxed.
(3) receiving funding from immigrant groups who brought ideas about the sinfulness of alcohol with them from their home countries.
(4) taking advantage of the movement to further their own political agendas even though they did not necessarily believe in it.