Educating Finns

Finland, a country in northern Europe, has been ranked as having the highest quality of life in the world. In particular, Finland has been attracting attention for the success of its schools. Since 2000, the country often appears near the top of an international survey of educational standards called PISA. This survey measures the academic level of 15-year-olds around the world in science, math, and reading once every three years.

What surprises many people about Finland’s success is that the country is so different from the others that come at the top of the survey. Those countries’ schools generally emphasize competition between students and between schools, and they often have long hours of study, much homework, and frequent tests. The success of this educational style has led to more countries introducing such competition into their own education systems. Finland, however, has taken a different approach to education. [147]

Most schools in the countries at the top of the PISA survey
(1) encourage their students to participate in sports to create competition.
(2) focus on competition and require students to study for many hours.
(3) believe that all students should receive the same education.
(4) doubt that Finland’s education system is good for students.



The Finnish government requires no standard textbooks or tests. Rather, teachers are allowed to plan lessons using whatever materials they think will be best for their students. Moreover, students are not required to do much homework. In fact, the average 15-year-old studies less than 30 minutes outside of school each day. A student’s academic performance does not affect which classes or schools that student attends, and the country has almost no private schools. All these policies are the opposite of those being adopted by other countries. The aim of this system is to promote equality between students instead of focusing on high scores. [103]

What is one thing that is unusual about the Finnish education system?
(1) Schools encourage children to get high scores on English tests.
(2) The Finnish government requires students to take many tests.
(3) Teachers are encouraged not to teach children from other countries.
(4) Students are not separated according to their ability or results.



In order to create equal opportunities for each student, the Finnish government relies greatly on individual teachers and trusts them to make the best decisions for their classes. These teachers are, in turn, rewarded with high salaries and social status. This creates strong competition for teaching jobs, so only the most highly trained and qualified candidates can become teachers. This focus on students’ needs and high-quality teaching has led to Finland’s success. Seeing the strong results of these methods, some countries have begun to take a second look at their approach to teaching. Although education systems vary from one country to the next, all governments share the desire to provide the best education they can to their students. [118]

What is one thing that has led to Finland’s educational success?
(1) It gives job training to students who need extra help.
(2) It rewards students who achieve high scores on tests.
(3) It requires all teachers to teach the same lessons.
(4) It values and trusts the abilities of its teachers.