Songlines

Nowadays, when people are traveling long distances, they usually follow maps and signs to get to where they are going. Thousands of years ago in Australia, however, there were no maps or signs, but people still traveled long distances without getting lost. Aboriginal people had a special way to help them travel. They used songs to describe the mountains, rivers, and rocks that people would see while they were traveling. By following the directions in these songs, called songlines, people could travel without getting lost. [85]

Thousands of years ago, people in Australia
(1) had trouble learning how to read road signs.
(2) got lost when they were trying to find places.
(3) did not have maps or signs to follow when they traveled.
(4) did not travel because there were too many mountains.



Aboriginal people believe that songlines tell the story of the beginning of the world. They believe that before people lived on the earth, there were gods that lived here. The mountains, rivers, and valleys were created by these gods. For example, the Rainbow Serpent song tells the story of a snake god who created rivers and mountains while traveling around northern Australia. Aboriginal people sang this song and followed the same path. [72]

The Rainbow Serpent song
(1) tells the story of how snakes were first created.
(2) shows Aboriginal people which path to follow.
(3) teaches people that they should take care of nature.
(4) is sung by Aboriginal people to forget their problems.



There are songlines that describe almost every part of Australia, and they are sung in many different Aboriginal languages. However, even if people do not understand the language in the song, they can follow its directions. This is because both the words and the music help people to imagine what the land looks like. For example, a high sound means that something tall like a mountain is being described.

Songlines were an important part of Aboriginal culture for thousands of years, but this began to change when the British arrived in Australia in 1788. Aboriginal children had to go to British schools instead of spending time in nature and learning songlines from their families. Slowly, people began to forget the songlines. However, these days, the Australian government is working hard to save the songlines. [134]

What is one thing that changed when the British arrived in Australia?
(1) Aboriginal families spent more time singing songlines together.
(2) Aboriginal children began to spend less time learning their culture.
(3) British children began to study about Aboriginal culture in school.
(4) British families taught their children songlines to keep them safe.