The Origin of Modern Britons

For generations, students of British history have been taught that the Celts, a warlike yet culturally advanced ethnic group, were Britain’s indigenous people, having migrated from central Europe to populate present-day England and the rest of the British Isles during the Iron Age, around 400 BC. The Celts were subsequently overrun by a series of invaders in the fourth and fifth centuries AD, most notably the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes -- Germanic tribes from whom the modern population of England is said to be descended. According to traditional accounts, Celtic inhabitants remained in areas such as Ireland, Wales, and Scotland, but were wiped out by the Anglo-Saxons in England, and the Celts’ lyrical language, rich culture, and traditional lifestyle were lost there as well. This narrative has informed the identity of modern people in the British Isles, with the Scottish, Welsh, and Irish considering themselves ethnically as well as culturally distinct from the English. [154]

According to the author of the passage, how has the traditional historic account of the settling of Britain influenced the attitude of people in the British Isles?
(1) Britons have taken pride in the fact that the Celts established their superiority over earlier inhabitants by conquering Britain during the Iron Age.
(2) Other people of the British Isles have come to resent the English for their efforts to repress Celtic influence throughout Britain over many centuries.
(3) The repeated invasions of the islands by different groups have resulted in a cultural diversity that all Britons consider important to their identity.
(4) The belief that they have a distinct ancestry has caused some people of the British Isles to emphasize cultural differences between themselves and the English.



Recent scholarship and DNA research, however, have cast doubt on this version of British history. Stephen Oppenheimer, a medical geneticist at Oxford University, found that the vast majority of native Britons, including the Scottish, Welsh, and Irish, have DNA which indicates they are in fact descended from hunter-gatherers who lived in the area of the modern-day Basque Country in Spain at the end of the Ice Age. Celtic DNA, in contrast, comprises less than 10 percent of the total genetic makeup of the male population in the British Isles. According to Oppenheimer, the original inhabitants of Britain spoke not a Celtic language, but one related to the Basque tongue, and migrated along the Atlantic coast to Britain between 15,000 and 7,500 years ago. Oppenheimer believes Celtic languages originated in Anatolia (modern-day Turkey) and were most likely introduced, along with agricultural practices, via subsequent Celtic migrations along the north coast of the Mediterranean and then to Britain via France about 6,000 years ago, during the Neolithic Period. [166]

Stephen Oppenheimer believes that the Celts
(1) both arrived later and had a substantially less significant impact on the British gene pool than the Basque settlers did.
(2) were so similar genetically to the modern-day Basque people that the two groups can only be distinguished based on culture and language.
(3) gradually pushed out the indigenous peoples of England by replacing the hunter-gatherer lifestyle with agriculture.
(4) were clearly overwhelmed and largely displaced by incoming migrations from the European mainland during the Neolithic Period.



The account of the virtual annihilation of England’s indigenous Celtic peoples by Anglo-Saxon tribes is also contradicted by both linguistic and genetic evidence. In other nations whose indigenous populations were nearly wiped out and replaced by invading peoples, such as Australia and the United States, many place-names in the language of the original inhabitants have endured to this day. But in England, as Oppenheimer points out, very few places and geographical features bear Celtic names, and the language contains just a handful of Celtic terms. Moreover, genetic studies of modern Britons show that, far from predominating the English gene pool, the Anglo-Saxons barely made a splash. In fact, even the Vikings, who are generally portrayed in the history books as raiders rather than conquerors, have a larger genetic presence in modern-day Britain than the Angles, Saxons, and Jutes do. Rather, the Anglo-Saxon invasions seem to have occurred at the elite level, displacing rulers but leaving resident populations intact. “Based on the overall genetic perspective of the British,” says Oppenheimer, “it seems that Celts, Belgians, Angles, Jutes, Saxons, Vikings and Normans were all immigrant minorities compared with the Basque pioneers.” [189]


What does the evidence indicate about the Anglo-Saxon invasions of the British Isles?
(1) The Celts may have been forced to ally themselves with the Vikings in an effort to resist the attacks of the Anglo-Saxons.
(2) The relative absence of Celtic place names today suggests the Anglo-Saxons actively sought to wipe out Celtic culture.
(3) The idea that the Anglo-Saxons largely eliminated the native Celtic population from England is not accurate.
(4) The similarity of Celtic culture to that of the Anglo-Saxons shows the groups had interacted extensively before the invasions.