The Bystander Effect

It is not uncommon for victims of crimes and accidents to report that, even though there were other people nearby at the time, not a single person came to their aid. In fact, psychologists have found that the more people there are present, the less likely anyone is to come to the assistance of the person who is in trouble. This is known as the “bystander effect.” In a study of violent crimes in the United States based on data from the annual National Crime Victimization Survey, researchers found that 72 percent of the incidents had been observed by at least one witness. Because many violent crimes occur in densely populated areas, the bystander effect is often thought of as a symptom of urban lifestyles. People in modern cities tend to be less connected to their communities than small-town residents are, and city dwellers are thought to have become so fearful or uncaring that they hesitate to help strangers in need. [161]

What did the study of crimes in the United States indicate?
(1) The willingness of people to assist crime victims is affected by the length of time they have lived in an urban area.
(2) Victims of minor crimes in urban areas tend not to report them because such crimes occur so frequently.
(3) Witnesses are more likely to assist victims of crimes in situations involving violence than in other circumstances.
(4) In cases where violent crimes occur, there are usually other people present who observe them happening.



Psychologists have found evidence, however, that it is probably not living in cities that makes people less likely to help others. In fact, the bystander effect can be found in almost any environment. In an experiment conducted in 1968, psychologists John Darley and Bibb Latané put research participants in a room, sometimes alone and sometimes with others. They then introduced smoke into the room to indicate the presence of a fire. When the subjects were alone, 75 percent reported the possible fire. When two other people, pretending to also be participants, joined the subjects in the room and acted as if they did not notice the smoke, only 10 percent of the participants reported it. Darley and Latané concluded that when people observe that others around them are not responding to an event, they are much less likely to react themselves. [141]

John Darley and Bibb Latané say their experiment showed that people
(1) are often too afraid to take risks in situations where there is a chance they may be injured themselves.
(2) tend to decide whether they will get involved in a particular situation based on the reactions of others.
(3) are more likely to place their own safety above the needs of others in emergency situations such as fires.
(4) tend to react to dangerous situations by panicking when they are part of a group.



In recent years, efforts have been made to prevent the bystander effect, particularly in situations involving issues such as racism or child abuse. A big part of the solution seems to lie in altering social norms and standards of behavior. The forces that lead people to conform can be redirected, particularly if opinion leaders, such as popular students or celebrities, convince others that it is normal and desirable to offer help in situations where victims require aid. By developing a sense of obligation toward their community, people can overcome the forces that usually prevent them from getting involved during emergencies. If such a strategy can reduce the bystander effect, communities of all sizes might become much safer. [117]

How does the author of the passage suggest fighting the bystander effect?
(1) By changing people’s attitudes in order to increase their feelings of responsibility for the people around them.
(2) By educating people about the root causes of serious social problems such as racism and child abuse.
(3) By encouraging people to think for themselves rather than letting themselves be influenced by opinion leaders.
(4) By organizing community events that provide opportunities for people to get to know one another better.