Title IX

Title IX, a 1972 law designed to eliminate gender discrimination in education, states that any US educational institution that receives government funding must provide equal opportunities to female students. Early on, enforcement focused almost entirely on academic concerns, such as ensuring that female students had the same access to math and science programs that male students did. An unintended consequence of the law, however, was its huge impact on women’s athletics. The number of female high school athletes rose from fewer than 300,000 before the law to more than 3.2 million in 2012, and schools now provide much greater funding for female sports teams. [104]

When Title IX was passed in 1972,
(1) the public was opposed to the government giving funding to schools to promote women’s athletics.
(2) there was widespread concern that its focus on sports would lower the quality of math and science programs.
(3) its main goal was to ensure that females and males were given the same chances in the classroom.
(4) most schools were opposed to it because they did not want to have their budgets for athletics cut.


Around the time that Title IX was passed, public awareness of discrimination against female athletes was growing. Events like the famous Battle of the Sexes in 1973, in which female tennis champion Billie Jean King defeated a retired male champion named Bobby Riggs, brought greater attention to the issue. Public interest in the match was high, both because of King’s skill and because Riggs had made sexist comments such as, “I want to prove that women ... don’t belong on the same court as a man.” Changing attitudes about the role of women in sports, coupled with lawsuits against schools that failed to provide female athletes with adequate training facilities, meant US lawmakers began applying Title IX to athletics. This included the creation of rules forcing schools to provide equal opportunities for females to play sports and also provide them with the same facilities and equipment males receive. [150]

What is true of the Battle of the Sexes?
(1) It was a legal battle between schools and the US government that led to more opportunities for female athletes.
(2) It contributed to a national trend that led the US government to change its interpretation of Title IX.
(3) It made people acknowledge that if a woman could defeat a man in a
sporting event, women could also excel in academics.
(4) It demonstrated that the lack of adequate training facilities had been having a negative effect on female athletes’ abilities.


Some male athletes complain that Title IX has robbed them of opportunities, however. While schools have been forced to provide more support to female athletes, their overall budgets often have not expanded enough to accommodate the increase. At the college level in particular, funding for less popular men’s sports such as wrestling has been cut to make more money available for women’s sports teams.

Supporters of Title IX argue that overall, though, the law has had enormous benefits that extend far beyond the positive health effects of playing sports. Researcher Betsey Stevenson performed an analysis comparing states with varying degrees of female athletic participation. She found that in states where females had more chances to participate in sports, women’s education levels and likelihood of finding employment were also higher. In fact, Stevenson’s research indicates that Title IX was responsible for about 40 percent of the increase in employment among women aged 25-34 from 1980 to 2000. If true, this means the law has contributed significantly to helping women achieve equality with men. [172]

Research by Betsey Stevenson indicates that Title IX has
(1) led a number of states to consider passing a law that guarantees women the right to play on men’s sports teams.
(2) helped women remain healthy long after they have graduated from high school or college.
(3) improved overall education levels, even in certain states where access to athletics is still limited.
(4) had a major impact on society because it has helped a large number of women find jobs.